Clocks and Network Timing Articles (#9)
xsleaks/wiki: content/docs/attacks/timing-attacks/clocks.md

+++
title = "Clocks"
description = ""
date = "2020-07-21"
category = "attacks"
attacks = [
    "dom property",
]
defenses = [
    "same-site cookies",
    "sec-fetch metadata",
]
menu = "main"
+++

There are two types of clocks: Implicit and Explicit clocks. Explicit clocks are the ones developers use to get direct timing measurements and such mechanisms are offered **explicitly** by the browser.  Implicit clocks on the other hand, misuse particular web features to create unintended clocks which offer a relative timing.

## Explicit Clocks

### performance.now API

The [performance.now()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance/now) API allows developers to get high-resolution timing measurements.

{{< hint info >}}
`performance.now()` API got its accuracy reduced from a range of nanoseconds to a

> microsecond precision in all modern browsers, to mitigate some [XS-Leaks](httos://TODO) [^1] [^2] [^3].

Reviewer: It's not clear which XS-Leaks would benefit from nanosecond precision. Some examples would be really helpful to understand the impact. I am mostly aware of Spectre-alike attacks, have no knowledge about other leaks that would benefit from such a precise measurement.

Author: This page only addresses clocks, I tried not to include specifics on XS-Leaks. Later I wanted to refer to this section when speaking about XS-Leaks affected by this: Spectre, [The Spy in the Sandbox: Practical Cache Attacks in
JavaScript and their Implications](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~simha/spyjs.ccs15.pdf) (this was the one motivating the reduction) and I guess timing attacks in general (?).

I just noticed that this specific API [cannot be used in firefox](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance/now#Reduced_time_precision) unless you use COOP and COEP. I guess these are the same rules as SharedArrayBuffer. This is nice. I think we have to include this.

Reviewer: Examples are always nice to have because the provide more context. These two XS-Leaks look like a great portion of examples, definitely helpful to understand the importance. I myself forgot about cache attacks, so nice catch.

Author: I changed the comment so later I don't forget about being specific to the attacks. We still don't know which ones we will refer to.

Changed TODO comment in a1f3727

Reviewer: This comment seems to not be resolved by a1f3727. the problem I see is 
> `some` XS-Leaks

This is very unspecific and references are not enough to prove the point. This should be also written in a way that is 'print-friendly' so if someone prints it, they can still understand what the sentence is about. 

An easy fix would be to change it to something around the lines `to mitigate some of the XS-Leaks, for example Spectre attacks [^X] or Measuring the time it takes to process the Cache to infer information about its size [^Y]`

> microsecond precision in all modern browsers, to mitigate some [XS-Leaks](httos://TODO) [^1] [^2] [^3].

Author: Fixed in 122b275. Might change this later to specify the name of the specific XS-Leaks

## Explicit Clocks

### performance.now API

The [performance.now()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance/now) API allows developers to get high-resolution timing measurements.

{{< hint info >}}
`performance.now()` API got its accuracy reduced from a range of nanoseconds to a
microsecond precision in all modern browsers, to mitigate some [XS-Leaks](httos://TODO) [^1] [^2] [^3].

[^1]: Reduce resolution of performance.now (Webkit). [link](https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=146531)
[^2]: Reduce precision of performance.now() to 20us (Gecko). [link](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1427870)
[^3]: Reduce resolution of performance.now to prevent timing attacks (Blink). [link](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=506723)
{{< /hint >}}
<!--TODO(manuelvsousa): Change references to actual wiki articles, and enumerate specifically as per https://github.com/xsleaks/wiki/pull/9#pullrequestreview-479831958-->

{{< hint info >}}

> Browsers are considering [restricting this API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance/now) to documents which do not share a browsing context group with cross-origin documents. This will require an application interested in the API to explicitly opt-in to [COOP](https://TODO) and [COEP](https://TODO).

Reviewer 2: Didn't they already do this?

Author: In theory yes, I though firefox did not reach 80 yet. But checking I still have doubts:
> Starting with Firefox 79, high resolution timers can be used if you cross-origin isolate your document using the Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy and Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy headers

Sure. This make me believe you can't use performance.now unless you use COEP and COOP.

But [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Firefox/Releases/79):
> Cross-origin isolation has been implemented using the new Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy (COEP) and Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy (COOP) headers. This allows you to access certain features such as SharedArrayBuffer objects and **unthrottled** timers in Performance.now().

So this one make me believe they just make it more accurate if you set COOP and COEP.

Author: Experimenting it seems to work without COOP and COEP, so I assume the unthrottled version is the one out there

Author: Changed this one in 7b3ba82. I changed the references and the language. Please take a look and tell me if you agree

{{< /hint >}}

### Date API

> The [Date](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date) API is the oldest API present in browsers to obtain timing measurements. It allows developers to get dates, and get Unix timestamps with `Date.now()`. These measurements are much less precise compared to [performance.now()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance/now). Previous attacks prior to the introduction of modern browsers used to leverage this API [^3].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Date](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date) API is the oldest API present in browsers to obtain timing measurements. It allows developers to get dates, and get Unix timestamps with `Date.now()`. These measurements are much less precise compared to [performance.now()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance/now). Before the introduction of newer APIs attacks used to leverage this instead [^3].
```

## Implicit Clocks

### SharedArrayBuffer and Web Workers

With the introduction of `Web Workers`, new mechanisms to exchange data between threads were created [^1]. `SharedArrayBuffer`, one of those mechanisms, provides memory sharing between the main thread and a worker thread. Attackers can create an implicit clock with a `Worker` and use a `SharedArrayBuffer` as the tunnel to consult this clock. Since the `Worker` has its own thread, the clock consists of a simple infinite loop iterating over a structure shared with the main thread. This clock does not provide a time measurement, but rather a measurement on how fast the worker thread increments.

```javascript
// -------- Main Thread clock creation -------- 
var buffer = new SharedArrayBuffer(16);
var counter = new Worker("counter.js");
counter.postMessage([buffer],[buffer]);
var arr = new UintArray(buffer);
relative_time = arr[0];

// -------- Web Worker counter.js -------- 
self.onmessage = function(event){
  var[buffer] = event.data ;
  var arr = newUintArray(buffer);
  while(1){
    arr[0]++;
  }
}

```
{{< hint info >}}

> `SharedArrayBuffer` was removed from browsers with the appearance of [Spectre](https://spectreattack.com/). Later in 2020, it was reintroduced, but now requiring documents to be in a [secure context](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/SharedArrayBuffer) to make use of the API. This requirement prevents `SharedArrayBuffer` from being used as an implicit clock.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SharedArrayBuffer` was removed from browsers with the publication of [Spectre](https://spectreattack.com/). It was reintroduced later in 2020 requiring documents to be in a [secure context](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/SharedArrayBuffer) to make use of the API. This requirement prevents `SharedArrayBuffer` from being used as an implicit clock.
```
This is not correct. They require an isolated context, not just a secure one. A secure just requires HTTPs, this one requires COOP-COEP.

{{< /hint >}}

### Other Clocks

> There are a considerable amount of APIs attackers can abuse to create implicit clocks: [Broadcast Channel API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API), [Message Channel API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MessageChannel), CSS animations and others [^2].

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention requestAnimationFrame, which will run exactly once per frame, so it is quite precise, especially on mobile devices like ipads that have 120 fps.

Author: I added requestAnimationFrame and other clocks. I did not explained the inner workings. I also added a paper I forgot, which explains them really well and presents some results.

Fixed in 1b98a24
